Good morning, everyone.
It's a wonderful Friday,
very early morning for us all.
But we're here to talk about Arc.
So let's dive in.
In a nutshell, what is Arc all about?
Arc is about simplifying
retain and release.
I mean,
everybody loves retain and release,
I'm sure,
but we think it could be better,
it could be easier, it's more productive,
easier to maintain,
we can make Objective-C a
higher level language.
That's really the idea of Arc.
We think we've got something
really amazing here.
So if there's one thing that
you take away from this session,
it's that when Xcode 4.2 ships for real,
you should move your applications to Arc.
Arc is great technology and it's
really the future of Objective-C.
So we're really excited about this.
Let's talk about why you're
actually probably here,
though.
It's because we have a small
issue with applications crashing,
right?
Now, I know that your apps
never have these problems,
of course, but some other people's apps
occasionally have some minor issues,
right?
And this can be everything from,
you know, getting bad reviews because
an application ships and
people are complaining,
but only in weird cases, right?
It's only when that dangling
pointer in the app happens to
manifest in a really nasty way that
crashes on some weird configuration.
These problems are really nasty,
and some of them can lead to bad reviews,
they can lead to your app
being rejected from the store,
I mean, there's all kinds of problems
that can lead to crashes.
And so we think that crashes are one of
the major problems that we want to fix.
And crashes are the premier reason why
applications get rejected from the store,
so if we can fix this,
it makes life better both for
the end user but also for you
when you're submitting your app.
It means you're much more likely to get
through the approval process smoothly.
So we started looking at this and what
became really obvious is that memory
management is actually really hard,
right?
Everybody has to do this.
We've done it for a long time.
All programmers have to do this.
But if you look at the
number of tools that we ship,
everything from instruments,
which has a suite of really great
tools for debugging memory problems,
all the way down to VM map and
other really low-level tools,
it's really obvious that while
everybody understands memory,
it's actually pretty hard.
And when you start getting
into the details of,
okay, well,
somebody made one little mistake
somewhere in the application,
tracking it back to the root cause
is a lot of pain and suffering.
Now, you get really good at that,
but wouldn't it be better to be spending
that brain power building new features,
right?
So we think that memory management
is a really important problem and
something we really want to tackle.
Now, ARC doesn't solve all these
problems automatically,
but it defines away a large
number of the problems that are
the root cause of these things.
So if you look at how Objective-C has
been moving over time,
Objective-C is actually a
really interesting language.
It's based, as Craig said on Monday,
on pragmatism.
The pragmatic start of Objective-C was C.
C is a fantastic language.
C is the performance base that has made
the iPhone possible to be efficient
and have good battery life and all of
these wonderful things that we like.
And then you look at Objective-C.
Well, Objective-C,
the first major step was
to make C object-oriented.
[Transcript missing]
So, as we go forward, we talk about,
well, okay,
Objective-C is an amazing language,
and it's been using retain-release.
Retain-release is clearly good
enough to ship amazing products with,
right?
You guys have done this with your apps,
Apple's done it with
its operating systems.
The problem with Objective-C, though,
or with retain-release,
is that you're swimming in details,
right?
And you're forced to know things
like the Cocoa naming conventions.
Well, if you have a new method,
that returns a plus one.
If you have a copy method,
If you have a get method, it doesn't,
right?
You have auto-release pools.
You have things like block copy.
These things, experts, all of us,
can handle.
But particularly when you're
new coming to the platform,
and you haven't been
dealing with this before,
trying to wrap your brain around
what an auto-release pool really is,
when does that object get deallocated,
not so straightforward, right?
And so while you can
certainly learn this,
it's something that really is challenging
when you come to the platform.
Beyond that, when you're an experienced
programmer now,
you have many decisions you can make.
Should you use?
Should you use auto-releasing
creation methods?
Or should you use allocant?
Well,
they both sort of do the same thing.
But the first one's easier,
and you might want to
use it all the time.
But on the other hand,
you start feeling a
little bit guilty because,
you know, that's increasing your high
watermark through auto-release pools.
Well, this is certainly workable.
But, you know,
having to think about these details
is really distracting from the
real problem of writing apps.
So overall,
my personal problem with retain and
release is that it forces you to
think about so many details all the
time when you're writing your code,
that's actually not contributing
to the value of your app.
Memory management is a necessary
thing that everybody has to do,
but it's really just the side thing that
gets in your way of building a great app.
So the bigger problem though,
and where we started with this,
is crashes.
So one of the major problems
with manual memory management is
that it gives you the opportunity
to occasionally make a mistake.
And a bug creeps in.
And this means that if you
aren't perfect all the time,
which is something that
humans are not great at,
then, oh, well,
your app crashes in an obscure case.
You dereference a dangling pointer.
You have a memory leak.
These things aren't super common,
but particularly if you don't
have 100% knowledge of the
Cocoa Memory Management rules,
this can lead to major
problems in an application.
And so what this really means is
that we all end up being really
good at debugging problems,
and using these tools and understanding
what the application is doing,
what it's not supposed to be doing.
And I mean,
you guys are all smart people.
Wouldn't you rather not be
spending your time doing this?
So the idea, and based on all this
kind of information,
we said, hey, well,
let's see if we can make this better,
right?
Memory management,
clearly something we can make better.
What can we do?
The first step in Xcode was
the Xcode Stack Analyzer.
The analyzer uses an exponential
algorithm to walk through your
code and find all kinds of bugs.
And it's really powerful.
It can find many different kinds of bugs,
right?
It has limitations, though.
One of the great things
about the analyzer,
in hindsight,
is that we learned a lot from it.
We learned a lot about Objective-C,
and we realized that a lot of
the things that we thought we
knew about Objective-C were true,
and some were false, right?
We actually, it's a good way to
verify some assumptions.
One thing we learned, in particular,
is that some applications
have leaks everywhere,
right?
This is usually because somebody,
the person who wrote the application,
doesn't know the
Cocoa Memory Management Guides,
right?
And so we know this because
they end up filing a bug saying,
hey, the analyzer is completely broken.
It's saying I'm leaking everywhere.
What's going on?
And we look at the code, and it's like,
well, actually, sorry, but you are.
And so the reality that
people are leaking memory,
some people are leaking memory all
over the place in their applications,
really drove home the value of
automating memory management,
right?
People should not have to deal with this.
Another thing we learned is that
Cocoa has really strong patterns.
Again,
things like the naming conventions,
which we believe to be strong,
we believe that they were reliable,
actually are.
And so they're good enough
that we can automate them and
base new tools on top of them.
And then the third thing we
learned is that the analyzer
does have false positives.
It gets confused, okay?
It could tell you, hey,
you have a memory leak, you have a bug,
when you actually don't,
because the conditions that it
thought could happen actually can't.
Now, in the context of an analyzer,
that's fine, right?
It says, hey, you might have a bug.
And then you think about it,
and then you say, no, leave me alone.
In the context of Arc,
this is completely unacceptable,
because that means that instead
of telling you you have a bug,
it actually goes through
and adds a release.
when it should not be released and
now your application is crashing,
right?
And so learning the limitations
of the static analyzer is actually
really important and critical
to making Arc 100% reliable.
Because if the compiler
is not bulletproof,
you can't trust it.
If you can't trust it,
you really should not use it.
So the end result of all
of this is that we said,
hey, we want to automate this.
This is a worthwhile problem.
Instead of increasing the
complexity of Objective-C,
we're just going to define away a whole
bunch of stuff you had to deal with,
right?
Of course, there are problems.
We have to make it perfect.
We have to fix some performance
problems in the analyzer.
And that led to a different
implementation approach
for the Arc compiler.
But we really transferred the
interesting ideas from the analyzer.
And so we said, OK,
we really want to do this.
So today we're going to
talk about three things.
First, I'll tell you about Arc.
I'll tell you what the model is.
I'll tell you about what
programming it's like,
what the issues are that
you have to be aware of.
After that, John McCall will tell you,
how does the compiler work?
How does it reason about your code?
How does it decide where to
put a retain and release?
Now this is something you
shouldn't have to think about.
And you don't have to think about.
But hopefully it will be reassuring to
know that the compiler is based on really
simple rules and they can't go wrong.
And hopefully that will help with trust.
And at the end,
Patrick will come up and he'll show you
how to actually convert your application.
And what some common
problems you might see are.
And some things to be aware of with Arc.
So let's dive right in.
So Arc.
If you haven't heard yet,
it's all about automating objects
and the memory management for
objects in your application.
So the idea is really simple.
The compiler is going to insert
retain and release calls for you.
This means it's just retain and
release code like it always has been.
But you don't have to do
the memory management.
The compiler is going to do it for you.
A major feature of this.
This means that because it's
just retain and release,
it completely is interoperable with
existing retain and release code.
This means that your
application can be Arc even if
a system framework is not Arc.
This means that if you have a
.a file in your application,
it doesn't have to be converted.
You can convert your application
and not all the code in it.
So this interoperability
is a major feature of Arc.
In addition to the compiler features,
we've actually substantially
improved the runtime in many ways.
Performance, for example.
Adding zeroing weak pointers,
which we'll talk about in a few minutes.
And also making it compatible with
Snow Leopard and iOS 4 was no easy feat,
but it's really important.
And so Arc in a nutshell is a combination
of compiler and runtime features
that work really well together,
enable a really simple model so that
you just don't have to worry about this.
So to understand ARC,
I think one of the really important
things to realize is what ARC is not,
right?
Because this sets expectations
and also kind of tells you why
ARC works as well as it does.
So ARC is just automated
retain and release,
right?
Because it's automated
retain and release,
it's not a new memory model.
There's not some new thing
that's pervasively happening
in your application.
ARC is also, again, automating objects,
not malloc and free.
Well, this doesn't mean that you
can't use malloc and free.
You're welcome to call malloc.
You're welcome to open file
descriptors or whatever you want.
But if you call malloc,
you have to call free.
And so ARC will take care of,
for example,
deallocating all your IVARs and
your dealloc method for you,
or releasing all your IVARs and dealloc.
But if you have a file descriptor,
you still have to write a dealloc to
close it when your object goes away.
And so ARC is taking care
of your objects for you,
but it's not getting in your way
if you want to do other stuff.
And finally,
one of the major differences of ARC and
other approaches is that this is a
compile-time memory management model.
This is not a runtime
memory management model.
If you look at memory management,
there's really three different
places you can conceivably do it.
One is you force a programmer
to do it completely manually.
That's what retain-release is.
One is you do it completely at
runtime with the garbage collector.
So now you're trading off runtime
performance to scan the heap
and pause the application while
you're deallocating objects.
Well, that's a nice model in some ways,
but now you're trading off major
performance and predictability.
And now your objects get deallocated
whenever the collector kicks in,
not at a deterministic time when
the last reference goes away.
ARC is an amazing solution
that's right in the middle.
Instead of throwing away
runtime performance,
we're going to have the compiler do it.
This gives you the convenience of
not having to worry about memory
management without the performance
hit of doing it at runtime.
So we think it's a really amazing,
great answer for Objective-C.
So how does this work?
Well, basically you just
write Objective-C code.
You never call retain or release.
You just don't worry about it.
You just write the code the natural,
clean way that you should be writing it.
So here I have a method.
This method concatenates a first name and
a last name and it returns a full name.
Well, in manual reference counted code,
this would be a leak because
I'm allocating an object and
I'm returning it and full name
is not a +1 name for a method.
Well, in ARC, it says, "Okay, well,
you're returning an object here
that's +1 and so it will do the
auto-release for you." It's that easy.
If you write this a different
way and you use string with
format instead of allocating it,
then the compiler says, "Hey, well,
I don't need to auto-release
it because it's already,
you know, neutral +0,
right?" And it just does the right thing.
So you write the code the natural way
that you want and then ARC takes care
of the memory management for you.
It's really that easy.
So, one of the things that,
talking to people,
I've struggled with is that people say,
"Okay, well,
where does it insert the retain?
"How do I know that it's
going to be retained?
"How do I know that it's going
to do the right thing?" Well,
just don't do that, right?
First of all,
it's really hard because we have some
really advanced compiler optimizations
that move retains and releases
around and get rid of redundant
ones and all that kind of stuff,
but also because you
don't need to do that.
Just think about it
as you have an object,
as long as you have a
pointer to that object,
it's alive.
When the last reference
of that object goes away,
so does the object.
It's that easy.
So, that means that you start thinking
about pointers in your application.
Think about your object graph.
Think about if you have
a pointer to an object,
that pointer is keeping it alive.
That means it's owning
that in some sense,
right?
And so now you start thinking
about what that means,
and the one thing you have
to keep in mind is the
possibility of a retain cycle.
and I are here to help you.
So, overall,
just forget about retain and release.
Hopefully, you're okay with that.
I don't want to take away
your best friend or anything.
But you can just leave it behind.
So what does this do when you
move an application to ARC?
I mean, the primary thing that
you may be wondering is,
OK, I moved my app to ARC.
What happens?
Well,
the most obvious common thing is that
your dialog methods just disappear.
Tons of code dissolves.
All those calls to retain
and release go away.
Your code becomes much simpler.
Now, there are some cases where
ARC requires new code.
But these actually are
really great things,
because if you look at some of the
places where ARC requires this,
you can see that it's making
your code easier to understand.
Now, here's a class, an example,
and in Manual Reference Counting,
I look at this IVAR A and say, "Hey,
is this a retained IVAR or not?"
And so to find that out,
I go look through the implementation,
I look for all the uses of A, and I say,
okay, well, it's not being retained,
so therefore it's an unretained IVR.
And because I don't want to
have to do the search again,
I add a comment.
It says, hey, this is unretained.
Well, this is a really fragile thing,
because looking at the interface,
if you didn't add this comment,
you don't know.
It's really easy to make a mistake
and actually retain it when assigning,
and this is why properties came along.
This is kind of solving the
problem through the language.
ARC takes the same problem and solves
it a slightly different way by adding
an annotation right onto the IVR.
And so we're building it right
into the language where you say,
hey, this defaults to a retained IVR,
but if you want to have a weak IVR or
a non-retained IVR of some other sort,
you add it right to the code.
This means that looking at the code,
it's really obvious how
your IVRs are being used,
and you can't mess it up,
because the compiler
takes care of it for you.
So we think that these
additions are really great.
It makes your code much more obvious,
and it makes it easier to understand
when somebody else comes to your code
and needs to fix a bug or add a feature.
This is the right thing to do.
So how do we make Arc compatible
with existing code?
So before the conference,
you're happily writing
retain-release code,
and we can't just say, "Hey, well,
your code doesn't
compile anymore." Right?
You probably would not appreciate that.
So to do that, we add a new flag.
Arc is a new mode in the compiler
that's enabled by passing fobjc_arc,
and that means that if
you're not passing this flag,
which you haven't been,
then your application still
builds the same way it was,
and you know what?
Retain-release will always be supported.
There's no problem with that, right?
If you like manually
doing retain-release,
you can continue to do that.
So Arc only is kicked in when you
have an Arc application or when,
you know, the flag is being passed.
Now, part of this is that in Xcode 4.2,
all the new projects default to Arc.
So if you start a new app,
it will automatically be Arc.
If you have an existing app,
then you go through a process
called migration to get to Arc,
And we'll show you how
that works in a bit.
So I talked before about the
static analyzer and how the
static analyzer is a great tool,
but it gets confused.
This is completely
unacceptable for the compiler.
The compiler must be 100% reliable.
Now to do this,
we have to make an engineering
trade-off on how do we make it so
the compiler can reason about the
code 100% of the time correctly.
So the solution to this is that
we're actually adding a few new
rules that you have to follow in
ARC mode that make it 100% reliable.
And at the end of the day,
it formalizes best practices
Objective-C anyways.
And so there's four new rules,
and let's walk through those.
The first rule is that the
compiler is going to be doing
the retains and release for you.
That means you are not allowed
to call retain and release.
If you try, the compiler will tell
you you can't do that.
Now I'm sorry,
I hope you're not sad about this.
I mean, it means that wonderful things
like this where you're looping over
the retain count calling release,
you can't do that anymore.
I know you're disappointed, right?
But the great thing is you don't have to,
right?
This is a sign that something
has gone tragically wrong.
This isn't a feature, right?
And so, in fact, not calling retain and
release is a huge feature.
Now, one other aspect of this is
it means you can't implement
retain and release yourself.
And there have been a few
patterns that have needed this.
And so to solve that,
we've actually added other
answers for those patterns.
So singletons, for example,
one common way to implement
a singleton was to implement
retain and release for yourself.
Well,
you just don't have to do that in ARC.
One common reason was for
performance because NSObjects
retain and release implementation
wasn't as fast as it could be.
So we heavily optimized NSObjects
retain and release performance.
So now you don't have to do that, right?
And so instead of giving
you a way to do this,
we've tried to define a way
the reasons you wanted to.
The second rule is that you're
not allowed to use a retained
pointer to an object in a C struct.
Now this is a pretty nasty one
because it seems like the compiler
should be able to make it work.
The problem here is that the compiler
needs to know when an IVAR or a reference
to an object comes and when it goes.
C structs are completely freeform.
You can allocate them with malloc
and they're filled with garbage.
You can pass them off to free
and they get deallocated.
You can pass them through several levels
of function call and then they get freed.
Well, the problem with this is
that when you do that free,
the compiler needs to
know to release that IVAR.
And okay, well,
you have a pointer to a struct.
Is it a pointer to one struct?
Is it a pointer to an array?
The compiler doesn't know.
And so instead of guessing and
trying to make it sometimes work,
we said we need it to be reliable
and so just don't do this.
Now, this again is not a huge problem.
You shouldn't be using
C structs anyways generally.
You should use objects.
So best practice in Objective-C is
and always has been to use objects.
And so if you're using
these kinds of things,
objects are a good answer.
If this doesn't work for you
because you have like some dense
hash table or something like that,
you can use void star.
So this is an example of the
kinds of tradeoffs we've made so
that it makes your code easier
to reason about for the compiler.
It makes it really clear what's
happening in your application.
So another issue is casting.
So we do not automate objects.
We do not automate file
descriptors or core foundation
or anything other than objects.
So if you do a cast,
the compiler has to know if you're
casting to a CFRF or a void star,
is it retained or not, right?
And so if you try to do a bear cast like
one of these guys where you're casting
between a CFRF and an object pointer,
then the compiler will tell you, hey,
you can't do that.
Well, what's the solution?
The solution is to tell the
compiler what it needs to know.
And so we're adding a few
new modifiers to these casts.
So you say, hey,
this is a transferring cast.
This gives the retain count from the
CF object to the-- to arc to manage.
And I'm not going to go
into these in detail,
but it's very straightforward.
We're also adding new CF API.
So you can say,
I want to do a CF bridging retain,
things like that.
And so this gives you new
patterns so you can use.
And the idea here, again,
is that we don't want to be
super intrusive in the code,
but the compiler has to
know what's going on.
Otherwise, you get a fragile model
that's not reliable.
And the compiler has to be reliable.
So the fourth thing is, again,
a really minor thing.
You can't use the
NSAutoReleasePool class.
Well, NSAutoReleasePool is this
interesting class where it's never
really been an object anyways.
I mean,
you allocate it with alloc and it,
but you can't actually retain it.
If you retain it, it throws an exception.
So the problem with NSAutoReleasePool
from the compiler's perspective is
it's not necessarily properly scoped.
It's not necessarily properly balanced.
You can do all kinds of weird things.
You can do an alloc and then
sometime later do an init,
for example.
And the compiler has to reason about
references that live across that pool.
Well, to do this, we build it directly
right into the language.
There's a new @AutoReleasePool statement.
It works just like @Synchronize,
where on entry it pushes
and on exit it pops.
Really straightforward, syntactically,
also much more elegant.
And this defines away the problem
and makes the model 100% reliable.
Now, through these four simple rules,
we get a really great model where
we think that Objective-C code is
easier to read and the compiler
will always do the right thing.
And that's really the power of ARC.
So let's talk about one more minor issue,
which ARC-- also,
@AutoReleasePool works everywhere,
not just in ARC.
So one more minor issue,
which is retain cycles.
Now, ARC is just automating
retain and release.
So the compiler is doing
retain and release for you.
Now, unfortunately,
the compiler is not doing that.
The compiler does not know the
bigger picture of how the objects
in your application work together.
So because of this and because
it's just retain and release,
retain cycles,
which have always-- the possibility
of retain cycles always existed,
can still happen in ARC.
So to give you an example of this,
say you have some objects.
Each of these objects get a retain count.
So there's three
pointers-- the first one,
two pointers, the second one, et cetera.
Now, if you drop a reference
to an object in a cycle,
the retain count drops,
but it doesn't drop to zero.
Thank you.
So, we're going to talk about
the source of crashes,
right?
Because an assigned property
or non-retained IVAR is,
you know, a potentially dangling pointer.
It's pointing to an object,
the object gets deallocated, you know,
you have a pointer to that old object,
and if you dereference it, well,
it won't crash for you,
it'll crash for your customers instead,
right?
This is the insidious kinds of problems
that memory management bugs lead to.
And so we want to solve this as well.
So in addition to automating
memory management,
we're introducing a new kind of
pointer called a zeroing weak pointer.
[Transcript missing]
So, we're not going to go in
depth into blocks here,
but if you're interested,
there was a talk earlier this week,
and the Objective-C advancements
in-depth talk later today,
we'll talk about this in more detail.
So, ARC now is, I think,
a really fantastic model for Objective-C.
You may be wondering, can you use it?
Well, the first thing to keep in mind
is that there is no runtime that's
kicking in and stopping your
application to collect memory.
So, first of all,
you don't have any of those kinds of
problems that cause your application
to stutter in unpredictable ways
because the collector kicks in.
So, ARC doesn't require that.
What about performance elsewhere?
Well, we really wanted to take away
any fear that ARC was going
to cost you performance.
So, we went through and optimized
three different subsystems of the
Objective-C runtime and the frameworks.
One is the retain-release
implementation in NSObject,
one is the new auto-release pool syntax,
and one is Objective-C message
send itself.
And so, in iOS 5 and in Lion, now,
you'll see the NSObject is much faster,
two and a half times
faster than it was before.
This is a major performance win,
and this defines away many
reasons for wanting to implement
your own custom retain-release.
Also, the new auto-release pool syntax,
it doesn't have to allocate an object,
it's just bumping a pointer.
It's much faster than
NS auto-release pool used to be.
So, it's six times faster.
This means if you did crazy
things where you're saying,
"Okay, well, in my loop,
only drain it some time,"
you can just use auto-release
pool and not worry about it.
It's much simpler,
you shouldn't have to worry
about this kind of stuff,
right?
We've even sped up
Objective-C message send.
Now, I admit,
this is not a huge speed up.
We shaved three cycles off it.
It turns out Objective-C message send
is already highly performance optimized,
but it's really core part of Objective-C,
and it turns out three cycles
on something that's not 12
cycles is a huge speed up,
right?
And so, we think that these substantial
changes in the performance
of the object-c message send,
will really help with performance
of the system overall and
with Rcaps in particular.
So, a final optimization,
which we'll describe again in
more detail in the in-depth talk,
is that the compiler and runtime
were co-designed so they could do
really impressive optimizations.
One example of this is with
auto-release return values.
So, in many cases,
when an ARC method calls some other
code which ends up doing an auto-release
and returning an auto-release object,
that object never gets put
in an auto-release pool.
It gets magically warped back to ARC,
and it can just use it directly,
which saves a retain,
it saves an auto-release,
that object doesn't get put in
the auto-release pool at all,
making this dramatically faster,
up to 20 times faster.
This means atomic properties,
common getters,
a lot of things are much faster,
which doesn't work in non-ARC mode,
but this is one of the major
advantages of co-designing
the language with the runtime.
It's fantastic.
So, we'll explain more about how
this works in other talks.
But this gives you a really high-level
idea of what ARC's all about.
It's about synthesizing retain-release,
so the compiler does it,
and you don't have to.
We add a few new runtime things,
like zero-week pointers,
which help define away a common
cause of crashes in applications.
And to make it reliable,
there's new rules that you can follow.
They're not onerous.
They're very simple.
And the result of this is that
you get a great model where your
applications generally just work.
You don't have to worry
about retain-release.
In many cases, they're even faster
than they were before.
And, you know,
it's just a better place to be.
So, to give you an idea of
how this actually works,
details that the compiler thinks about
and you don't have to worry about,
I'd like to invite John McCall up to tell
you about what goes into the compiler and
how the compiler thinks about your code.
John?
Thanks, Chris.
My name is John McCall.
I work on the compiler
team on the LLVM compiler,
most recently on automated
reference counting.
I want to give you an idea
of how ARC does all of this,
mostly so that you can have a lot
more confidence in the compiler,
but also so that when you understand
how you might need to make -- if you
need to make -- if you still -- if
you can't convert completely over
to Automated Reference Counting,
if you need to have some
of your stuff still manual,
retain, and release,
then you kind of need to know this
so that you understand how that
code needs to interoperate with ARC.
So, memory management is hard.
Chris covered this great.
I don't want to belabor this.
But there's a lot of
rules and conventions,
some of which I'm going to go over today.
It's a lot of -- it's a huge
hurdle for coming to our platform.
It requires constant attention
for existing developers,
and it really requires perfection.
And to really bring that home,
I want to work through an example
of what I consider to be a great
application as a compiler writer,
which is a stack.
Now, this is a very simple stack.
We've got a -- it's backed
by an NSMutable array.
We allocate that in the init.
We push it.
When we want to push
something onto the stack,
we just add it to the end.
When we want to pop
something from the stack,
we just pull it off and then
actually remove that last thing.
This is a very natural way of coding,
and it makes sense to
write code like this.
But if you're an experienced
Objective-C developer,
you're already looking at this and
probably identifying three or four
different major memory problems in this,
right?
So the first one of those is
that this array is auto-released.
So when we're storing it in,
if this stack needs to persist
across popping an auto-release pool,
like between UI events,
this array is just going to become
magically a dangling reference.
All of this is when you're compiling
in manual retain and release mode,
of course.
So in order to fix that in
manual retain and release,
we have to actually insert this retain.
That causes a problem because
now that retain is not being
balanced out by this code anywhere.
So we end up needing to add this
totally new method that we didn't,
you know,
think that we needed to write before,
called Dialog,
which will actually release that thing.
And as part of doing that,
you have to also remember
to call superDialog.
And of course,
none of you would ever make this mistake,
but it does happen.
That fixes the problem with this IVAR,
but then we have this other
problem with the pop method,
where we pull something out of the array,
and then we remove the
array's reference to it.
And if that was the
last reference to that,
if that was the last
retained count of that,
This is going to be a dangling
reference immediately,
and we're going to end up returning
that and probably crashing our caller.
And the really frustrating thing about
that is that sometimes it'll work,
because sometimes the objects that I've
stored in here are retained elsewhere,
and sometimes it'll work because I'm
accessing a reference that's gone away,
but maybe nothing else is
allocated at that same address,
and it still kind of works.
And sometimes it'll look like it
works for even more elaborate reasons,
and it's frustrating.
So the way that you have to fix that,
again, in manual mode,
is that you actually
have to do a retain here,
but that's a problem,
because that's going to
end up giving us a leak,
because our callers aren't going to
expect to have to do a release here,
so instead we have to do an
auto-release at the last second.
This is a very small,
kind of contrived example,
but it's the sort of thing that you have
to think about all the time when you're
doing manual retain and release code.
Right?
You shouldn't need to write about that.
You shouldn't need to worry about that.
It should just work.
ARC makes this just work.
I'll go ahead and blow my punchline.
This is a -- that code that you
just saw works perfectly in ARC.
It works exactly the same way that we had
to write -- that we wrote out manually.
Right?
So the idea here is that in ARC,
you can just write code naturally
the way that you want to do.
Right?
You don't have to worry
about retains and releases.
The compiler just does it for you.
All you need to worry about
is breaking cycles when
necessary in your object graph.
Otherwise, you can focus on the things
that are important to you.
So, how does Arc actually do this?
Well, mostly it's just automating
existing practice.
It's automating what you would have had
to do in manual retain and release mode.
It does that by applying
very local rules.
So,
on the scope of an individual operation,
it's always balancing
out retains and releases.
Individual stores or
calls or things like that.
It's trying to guarantee
local correctness,
which then ends up creating a
whole lot of work for itself,
and then we have an extremely
powerful optimizer to clean that
up and make it as fast as possible.
But that's the high-level
view of how Arc works.
Now I said it applies local rules.
There are really two
classes of rules here.
The first class is the rules for having
a pointer to something in memory,
right?
What I'm going to call a variable.
Like this is any sort of -- but this
is really any sort of place where
we're storing a pointer in memory.
Like a global variable or an instance
variable or something like that.
Anything -- any sort of variable like
this that's an Objective-C pointer
type or a block pointer type
ends up being managed by Arc.
We looked at all the code
that's out there right now
when we were designing Arc,
and we identified three different
common patterns for three different
ways in which we could automate how
people keep references in memory.
The most important one of those
by far is strong references.
So this is what a strong reference is,
is it maintains the invariant
that whatever it's holding onto
is retained by that variable.
In Arc, this is the default variable.
So when you write something
like NSString name here,
you're actually going to get
what the compiler interprets
this as is strong NSString name.
And it really works a lot
like a retained property.
What do I mean by that?
Well, when we're creating a variable,
and this is any sort of variable.
Like even a local variable on the stack.
The first thing that we always do
is we always initialize it to nil.
This is important for the code
that we're going to generate,
but it's also really,
really crucial for the
safety of your code.
This by itself is going to save you a
huge amount of annoying debugging effort.
Because you don't have to worry about
random little bits of code that you
forgot to initialize and therefore get
filled with total trash from the stack,
and then your program
has all sorts of errors.
All sorts of crazy errors
in it that only turn up far
downstream of the original bug.
So it's a lot safer.
This is a huge -- this by itself
is a huge improvement in your
life as an Objective-C programmer.
The second important thing is
when you're destroying a variable.
Like for a local variable,
that means when it goes out of scope.
For an instance variable,
that means when it's being deallocated.
When you're destroying
a strong reference,
you just take the current
value in it and you release it.
Right?
Maintaining the invariant that --
You know, you have this invariant that
whatever is in there is retained.
When the variable goes away,
you have to release it.
This happens for everything.
Because we do this even for IVARs,
that's the most common reason
for you to need a dialog.
Usually, you will almost never need
to write a dialog anymore.
The last two rules for dealing
with a variable like this are when
you're reading or writing from it.
Now, when you're reading,
there's nothing special going on at all.
For writes, again,
we're maintaining that invariant.
So that means you take the new value
that you're doing the assignment,
you retain that,
Remember the old value, do the store,
and then release the
old value afterwards.
Right?
Again, maintaining that invariant.
And that's it.
That is most of how Arc actually
keeps things working.
Right?
Just applying those simple
rules methodically over and
over again throughout your code.
So the second set of semantics
that we found for local variables,
variables in general,
are auto-releasing references.
This is really just solidifying
the behavior of out parameters.
So this is just describing what these do.
It's not really useful for general use,
so I'm going to gloss over this.
Basically, it just means you retain an
auto-release when you write into it.
And otherwise,
it doesn't have any extra rules.
The third kind--
is unsafe references.
So this is a lot,
the behavior a lot like an
assigned property today.
In fact,
it's exactly like an assigned property.
So when you're loading from it,
it's just a load.
When you're storing from it,
it's just a store.
Totally unmanaged by the compiler.
That means there's no extra logic for it.
It also means there's no restrictions.
So you can put it in a stack
or on a stack like that.
Or in a struct.
You can have one of these in a struct.
Now, because there's no extra logic here,
they really are unsafe, right?
You can end up, these can easily become
dangling references.
So we said, "All right,
well those are the three kinds "of
variables that we see in code today,
"but this one is really bad, right?
"This is not how you should be,
you know..." Chris mentioned that there's
all these potential problems with it.
We think we can do better.
We can give you a better tool
for breaking routine cycles than
just these unsafe references.
So instead we added
weak references to Arc,
right?
They behave exactly like
assigned references,
except for this magical thing
where they become nil as soon as
the objects that they're pointing
to starts to be deallocated.
Now, the way that works is that the
compiler inserts all these crazy
and I have a few crazy calls whenever
you're manipulating one of them.
If you really want to know
a lot more about these,
feel free to come to
the Objective-C talk.
I encourage you to.
That's 11:30 today.
But for the most part,
you don't need to worry
about how it's actually done.
Just think about it as
behaving like a weak reference.
It just drops down to nil magically
when the object goes away.
So the second set of rules are
for transfers in and out of the
control of the local function.
For the most part,
that means a return value.
Is a return value transferring ownership
of a retained count to ARC or not?
That's really going to be
decided in Cocoa by the kind
of call that you're doing,
the name of the call.
So we have this concept
called a method family.
This is really just the existing
Cocoa naming convention.
So if you have a method whose,
and the first word in that selector,
and the selector for that method
starts with one of these magic words,
then it just,
then it returns a plus one object
that Arc has to balance out.
Everything else doesn't.
Any sort of C function
called the default behavior,
it's just going to return an unmanaged,
you know, a plus zero.
We have to do retains
and releases ourselves.
So how does that -- how do those
rules end up translating into code
that the compiler does for you?
Well, a normal return where
there's no transfer,
you just -- at the point of return,
you retain immediately,
pop out through all the scopes of
the local variables that you're in,
and then auto-release
at the very last moment.
And Chris mentioned that
that auto-release is often
going to be optimized.
It will just turn into, you know,
it'll be a transfer of that retain
count directly to the caller.
For a retained return, like a method,
same method, just called new instead,
that's going to pass back ownership.
So it basically works
exactly the same way,
except without the
auto-release at the end.
And then on the other side of that,
where we're accepting it,
We just take the value back,
use it however we're going to use it,
and then release it sometime later at
the end of the statement when we're
sure we're not using it anymore.
So that's it.
These are the rules that
Arc uses to make your code safer.
So let's go back to our example.
Here we have this init method.
The important thing to look at
here is that we've got an IVAR.
We have a strong IVAR now.
And we have this assignment to it.
So when we expand out that assignment,
again, like I mentioned before,
we're going to retain the new value,
release the old value.
And then since we have a strong IVAR,
we're automatically
synthesizing this dialog.
No complexity here.
Just straightforward making it work.
For this pop method,
there's two interesting things going on.
The first is that we
have this local variable,
which we have this assignment to,
and then it goes out of scope.
And the second thing is
that we've got a return.
So let's expand that return first.
Like I said,
you do a return by retaining,
popping out through all the
scopes that you're inside,
and auto-releasing.
So we pop out through all the scopes.
So let's expand the behavior
for this local variable.
We do a retain as part
of initializing it,
and then when it goes out of scope,
we release.
Now you can see already
That there's this totally
unnecessary retain and release pair.
This is the most trivial sort
of thing that our optimizer
is capable of deleting.
It's much more sophisticated,
but it can certainly zap this case.
And we end up with exactly the code
that we would have written manually.
It's the local rules that make this work,
right?
You have local rules making
individual operations safe,
and then you have a global
optimizer that's making sure that
doesn't cause you any extra effort.
The point is that you can
just write code like this.
That natural code that we
had in the original example,
it just works under Arc because of
this steady application of local rules.
So to put it together for you,
ARC is there to follow the conventions.
Compilers are great at
following conventions.
We have to follow
conventions for everything,
right?
I get up in the morning to make
the compiler follow conventions.
Let me do that, right?
I can make the compiler follow the
rules much more precisely than you can,
right?
It's really simple to
just take these rules,
apply it over and over again,
and end up with code that just works.
What I can't do is make your apps great.
I can't make your customers happy.
So what I can do is let you do that
so that you don't have to think
about retains and releases anymore.
And that's the value of Arc.
So I want to call up Patrick Beard
to talk about how you can convert all
of your existing code over to Arc and
therefore take advantage of all this
stuff for what you're already doing.
Thanks, John.
So as John said, lots of rules.
The compiler is going to think about
them real hard so you don't have to.
So I'm going to talk about
how you migrate your code,
what you're going to see
while you're migrating,
how you actually make this stuff work,
how you put it on the
on our operating systems.
And then I'll do a quick
demo about some real code.
So the steps.
Well, first, to get into this,
you have to use our compiler,
LLVM version 3.
You'll use a command in Xcode
which will change your code,
it'll analyze your code.
When it's satisfied and you have
made all the changes that it has
identified that you need to make,
then it will modify the code in place,
present you with the diffs,
and away you go.
So here's what it looks like in Xcode.
It's a refactoring.
This is what it does.
It goes through all your code,
finds all the problems, removes, retains,
release, auto-release,
gets rid of auto-release pools,
uses our new language construct.
and it will replace your
assigned properties wherever
possible with weak properties.
So this runs in two phases.
Analysis, where you find the problems,
treat them as compilers, fix them,
and then analyze again.
Then there's conversion.
Changes the code.
If you're happy with
the changes it makes,
compiles it, turns on the option,
opts in,
and your code now works and runs in Arc,
hopefully.
So here's some of the problems
you might find when doing this.
Here's a case where you
might have this in your code.
You're calling a method that
the compiler has no idea
[Transcript missing]
Another issue would be fancy
uses of auto-release pools,
where you want to go through a loop,
but you don't want to
drain the pool every time.
Well, that's not going to work anymore.
For this code to migrate,
it has to become block-structured.
So that's what this compile
error is telling us,
that you can't use this class anymore,
but I don't know how to fix it.
Please fix it for me.
So, a simple way to fix it,
just go ahead and use the
addAutoReleasePool construct.
And auto-release pools are
about six times faster.
So the empty case,
where there's nothing in the pool,
is just really fast.
We don't allocate any objects,
we just bump some pointers.
Another issue if you've
done any C++ programming,
this is going to be old news to you,
if you declare a variable
in a case statement,
cases that follow that
are going to generate this error.
It just basically means add a curly.
Very simple.
Now let's talk about singletons.
There's actually quite a number of
recommended recipes people write
about online in various places,
various forums,
maybe even some of our own,
that suggest ways of writing
singletons that are just not
necessary anymore under Arc.
You might have found examples
like this where you override,
retain, and release just to more or less
prevent errors where you're using
a singleton and you don't want
to accidentally over-release it
and have the singleton go away.
When you're writing code in Arc,
Arc takes care of this for you.
This won't even compile.
So you don't need to do this anymore.
Trust us.
Another method that people override
sometimes is allocWithZone.
Purpose here being to ensure there's only
one true instance that rules them all.
Well, you don't need to do that either.
And there's actually a subtle bug
that can occur if you do this.
If people call allocInit on
your class and they don't use
your singleton accessor method,
the init method can get called
multiple times on the singleton object.
So you have to be really careful about
writing an init method that handles that.
So just don't do it.
Writing singletons,
just use simple accessor methods.
If you want your singleton
allocation to be thread safe so that,
I don't know,
you get actually a correctly
allocated object if you're
using it for multiple threads,
use dispatch once.
That just solves the problem very neatly.
One other thing, class objects,
well they're objects.
They are singletons.
So if possible, in this example,
we could just use a
static global variable.
and write class methods to
do the exact same thing.
We don't even need to access
or allocate an instance.
So consider this pattern.
As we've said, assigned properties,
which are commonly used for delegates,
they're going to become weak.
Enough said about that topic.
It's very simple.
The migration tool will do
that for you automatically.
All right, now where can we use this?
Well, we're introducing this
with Lion and iOS 5.
But we provide a compatibility
library so you can actually deploy
your code and you don't have to
make the decision about using ARC.
You can just use it and it will
work on Snow Leopard and iOS 4.
So how does it work?
Well, you use the deployment target.
A very natural way of telling the
compiler this is what you're doing.
Choose an earlier deployment target:
10.6, iOS 4.
The linker will automatically be
given a library that is linked into
your program that runs at full speed
if you're running on iOS 5 or 10.7,
and it goes into a compatibility
mode if it finds itself on
an earlier operating system.
So your code is compatible.
We give you something,
we've got to take something away though.
The classes that we have in our
frameworks and our runtime system are
where weak references are supported.
So on these earlier systems,
weak references are not available.
So you have to use this
unsafe and retained.
The migration tool will actually
do this for you as well.
And the compiler won't let you
accidentally use a weak reference if
you're deploying to earlier systems.
It'll just become a compiler.
So it's convenient.
You'll always know what you're doing.
So let's do a demo.
So this is an open source application.
It's called WikiHow.
It's a front end to a website.
I've prepared this so
it should fire right up.
It's pre-built, not for Arc.
So let's see how this converts.
So right away,
it shows us that our main routine has
a problem with its auto-release pool.
This is actually an instance of that use
of an unstructured auto-release pool.
So we have to hoist this
variable declaration before it.
A way to think about this is think of
auto-release pulls as curly braces,
as scopes.
So by moving this now,
this variable is correctly scoped and
we'll be able to write our code this way.
Another issue is this undeclared
initWithIdentifier method.
We can use our indexer to find it.
copy it and add it to
our class declaration,
which is missing.
And as I said, case statements,
we're declaring variables here,
so fix that by adding a curly.
Oh yeah, somebody was getting fancy
with their singletons.
So we just tossed that out.
So mostly I've made a few small edits.
So we hit convert again.
Crossing fingers, and it comes up,
it's happy.
So we hit the next button.
Now what it's doing is generating a
snapshot so it can show us a diff.
And here's our diff viewer.
shows us all the changes it's made.
Take a look at main, simplified it,
a lot easier to read.
Here's a case where we have automatically
turned assigned properties into weak.
And just for fun,
at the bottom of this we see a
dialog method just got nuked.
Kind of nice.
So you'll see a lot of that
when you look through this code.
And a proof of the pudding, does it run?
It ran before.
There it is, running with Arc.
and if you want to learn how to arc weld,
you can use this tool for that.
So, thanks a lot.
Thanks, Patrick.
So we tried to really define a great set
of tools that work really well together
to make ARC real and get you to ARC.
So let's come back to the
evolution of Objective-C.
We talked about automation.
We're really raising the bar for
Objective-C and making it easier and more
natural to write code that just works.
We think that Arc is the latest
great step towards that goal.
So if you want more details
about ARC and about other
improvements to Objective-C that
have nothing to do with ARC,
we really encourage you to come
to the Objective-C Advancements
talk later today.
And there are a lot
of other improvements.
We'll talk more about how
ARC the runtime works,
talk about performance optimizations,
and also have some Q&A about
ARC and Objective-C.
So now if you'd like more
information about ARC and the
improvements that are coming out,
please contact Michael Jurowicz,
our Developer Tools Evangelist,
and we have a really fantastic
Programming with ARC release note
on the attendee portal for WWDC.
This document describes more details than
you could ever want to know about ARC,
I think,
including some of the enhancements
we're making that will be
coming out in the next seed.
If you have questions,
feel free to contact us at
the Apple Developer Forum.
So,
there are a couple of related sessions.
Earlier this week,
there are several compiler sessions
about the LLVM compiler and how
to move to the LLVM compiler.
If you're already using GCC,
or if you are currently using GCC,
we strongly recommend you move forward.
ARC is only available in
the Apple LLVM Compiler 3.
So with that,
I'd like to thank you for coming.
Have a great afternoon.